README.md, before:

Twisty Puzzle searcher.  Much like ksolve but, due to licensing issues on
that program, we have coded it completely from scratch.  We start from a
base of compatibility but do not guarantee it.

Important options (you should specify these):

   `-M` *#* megabytes of memory to use max; should be ~ 1/2 of your RAM and ideally a power of two; defaults to 8192 (8GB).

   `-t` *#*  number of threads to use; defaults to 4.

   `--nowrite`  don't write pruning tables to disk (regenerate each time).

Sample usage:

    ./twsearch samples/3x3x3.tws samples/tperm.scr

    ./twsearch -g samples/2x2x2.tws

    ./twsearch -c 20 --moves 2L,2R,U,F samples/4x4x4.tws samples/flip.tws

    ./twsearch --moves F,R,D,B,L --scramblealg U samples/3x3x3.tws

    ./twsearch --moves U,R,F -q -g samples/kilominx.tws

The maximum memory setting should be used carefully; on a machine running
Windows or OS-X with heavy browser usage and other programs, you may want
to set it to only one quarter of your physical RAM.  On a dedicated Linux
or BSD machine, you can probably set it to 90% of your physical RAM.
When using large pruning tables (such as when searching for solutions),
the pruning tables are always a power of two in size, so specify a value
somewhat larger than a power of two (so on a 64GB machine you might specify
-M 40000 to permit it to build a 32GB pruning table).  Be aware that the
memory size you set also sets the size of the pruning tables that are
written to disk.  Although they are compressed, the compression can
vary from 1.1X to more than 5X, but in general the longer the pruning
table takes to generate, the worse the compression.  All pruning tables
are written with extensions of .dat, so you might want to clean them
up occasionally if you start to run out of disk space.

Options:

`-a`    Set the maximum number of antipodes to print; the default is 20.

`-A`    Search for algorithms that hold most pieces in place.  You can
      give a digit immediately after the option to specify the type
      of search; 1 is normal iterated depth-first search; 2 is repeated
      sequences; 3 is conjugates.  By default all three are done in
      parallel.

`-c` *#*  Set the number of solutions to print (you might get more than this).

`-C`    Calculate and print information about canonical sequences.

`--checkbeforesolve`  Check that a position is legal before attempting to
                    solve it.  This may take extra time or memory for
                    large puzzles.

`-d` *#*  Set the max depth to search.

`-F`    Force the use of arrays rather than bitmaps in God calculations.

`-g`    Calculate God's algorithm.

`-H`    When doing God's algorithm calculations, use 128-bit hash to
        encode states rather than actual packed state representation.

`-i`    Read sequences from stdin and write inverted sequences to stdout.

`-m` *#*  Set the max depth to search.

`-M` *#*  Set the maximum memory size as an integer number of megabytes.

`--mindepth`   Start solving at this depth.

`--moves` *moves*  Gives a comma-separated list of moves to use.
               All multiples of these moves are considered.  For instance,
               --moves U,F,R2 only permits half-turns on R, and all
               possible turns on U and F.

`--newcanon` *#*  Instead of using standard canonical sequences based on
              commuting moves, use canonical sequences based on unique
              positions seen through depth n.  This can help prune the
              search space for certain puzzles if n is tuned properly.

`--nocenters`   Ignore centers in the input .tws file.  Centers are sets
              whose name starts with 'ce' (ignoring case).

`--nocorners`   Ignore corners in the input .tws file.  Corners are sets
              whose name starts with 'c' and whose third letter is 'r'
              (ignoring case).

`--noearlysolutions`  Don't print trivial solutions (those of length zero).

`--noedges`     Ignore edges in the input .tws file.  Edges are sets
              whose name starts with 'ed' (ignoring case).

`--noorientation`  Ignore all orientation information in the tws file.

`--nowrite`     Don't write pruning tables to disk; regenerate them every time.

`-o`    Print the order of every scramble from standard input.

`--orientationgroup` *#* For puzzles using adjacent element permutations rather
                     than explicit orientations for orientation (as is needed
                     when the orientation is not cyclic, as for the 2x2x2x2),
                     this sets the number of adjacent elements that comprise
                     a single cubie.

`-q`   Use quarter-turn metric.

`-r`   Generate and show a random position.

`-R` *#*  Set the seed for the random number generator.

`-s`    Given a set of scrambles on standard in, solve each and write
      a solution to standard out.

`-S`    Do a solve test; for the given tws file, solve sequences of
      increasing length.  The number of moves to add each time can
      be provided immediately after the argument (as in -S20).

`--schreiersims`    Run the Schreier-Sims algorithm to calculate the supergroup
                  size.  Does not account for identical pieces.

`--scramblealg` *scr*  Give a scramble to solve directly on the command line.

`--showmoves`    Given a set of scrambles on standard input (one per line),
               writes to standard output the move-format for those
               scrambles.  This way you can build composite moves; for
               instance, to make a move specification for the antislice
               move "U D" (a clockwise turn of both the up and down faces)
               on the 3x3x3, use the command

                  echo "U D" | ./twsearch --showmoves samples/3x3x3.tws

`--showpositions`  Given a set of scrambles on standard input (one per line),
                 writes to standard output the scramble-format for those
                 scrambles.

`-t` *#*  Specify the number of threads to use.

`-T`    Do a timing test.

`-u`    Read scrambles on standard input and only output unique ones (by
      the position they reach) on standard output.

`-v`   Increase verbosity.  If followed immediately by a digit, that digit
     sets the verbosity.

What is working so far:

* Parsing ksolve file
* God's algorithm
* Optimal solver for random positions
* Canonical sequence data
* Tree search using canonical sequences
* Write pruning tables
* Read pruning tables
* Parse scramble file
* Solve scramble positions
* QTM solves/pruning tables

Things to do:

* Add algebraic support for when reading scrambles
* Symmetry reduction
* Add grip information; derive moves according to SiGN
* Print antipodes on two-bit God's algorithm
* Coset solvers

Things to consider:

* Ignore pieces
* Blocking moves

Commit message:

Add --mergeseqs and --cancelseqs options.

README.md, after:

Twisty Puzzle searcher.  Much like ksolve but, due to licensing issues on
that program, we have coded it completely from scratch.  We start from a
base of compatibility but do not guarantee it.

Important options (you should specify these):

   `-M` *#* megabytes of memory to use max; should be ~ 1/2 of your RAM and ideally a power of two; defaults to 8192 (8GB).

   `-t` *#*  number of threads to use; defaults to 4.

   `--nowrite`  don't write pruning tables to disk (regenerate each time).

Sample usage:

    ./twsearch samples/3x3x3.tws samples/tperm.scr

    ./twsearch -g samples/2x2x2.tws

    ./twsearch -c 20 --moves 2L,2R,U,F samples/4x4x4.tws samples/flip.tws

    ./twsearch --moves F,R,D,B,L --scramblealg U samples/3x3x3.tws

    ./twsearch --moves U,R,F -q -g samples/kilominx.tws

The maximum memory setting should be used carefully; on a machine running
Windows or OS-X with heavy browser usage and other programs, you may want
to set it to only one quarter of your physical RAM.  On a dedicated Linux
or BSD machine, you can probably set it to 90% of your physical RAM.
When using large pruning tables (such as when searching for solutions),
the pruning tables are always a power of two in size, so specify a value
somewhat larger than a power of two (so on a 64GB machine you might specify
-M 40000 to permit it to build a 32GB pruning table).  Be aware that the
memory size you set also sets the size of the pruning tables that are
written to disk.  Although they are compressed, the compression can
vary from 1.1X to more than 5X, but in general the longer the pruning
table takes to generate, the worse the compression.  All pruning tables
are written with extensions of .dat, so you might want to clean them
up occasionally if you start to run out of disk space.

Options:

`-a`    Set the maximum number of antipodes to print; the default is 20.

`-A`    Search for algorithms that hold most pieces in place.  You can
      give a digit immediately after the option to specify the type
      of search; 1 is normal iterated depth-first search; 2 is repeated
      sequences; 3 is conjugates.  By default all three are done in
      parallel.

`-c` *#*  Set the number of solutions to print (you might get more than this).

`-C`    Calculate and print information about canonical sequences.

`--cancelseqs`  Read sequences on standard in and perform move cancellations
                to minimize the length of the sequences.

`--checkbeforesolve`  Check that a position is legal before attempting to
                    solve it.  This may take extra time or memory for
                    large puzzles.

`-d` *#*  Set the max depth to search.

`--distinguishall`  Distinguish all pieces, despite any identical
        piece definitions in the tws file.

`-F`    Force the use of arrays rather than bitmaps in God calculations.

`-g`    Calculate God's algorithm.

`-H`    When doing God's algorithm calculations, use 128-bit hash to
        encode states rather than actual packed state representation.

`-i`    Read sequences from stdin and write inverted sequences to stdout.

`-m` *#*  Set the max depth to search.

`-M` *#*  Set the maximum memory size as an integer number of megabytes.

`--mergeseqs`  Read move sequences on standard input and merge the sequences
               into canonical sequences.

`--mindepth`   Start solving at this depth.

`--moves` *moves*  Gives a comma-separated list of moves to use.
               All multiples of these moves are considered.  For instance,
               --moves U,F,R2 only permits half-turns on R, and all
               possible turns on U and F.

`--newcanon` *#*  Instead of using standard canonical sequences based on
              commuting moves, use canonical sequences based on unique
              positions seen through depth n.  This can help prune the
              search space for certain puzzles if n is tuned properly.

`--nocenters`   Ignore centers in the input .tws file.  Centers are sets
              whose name starts with 'ce' (ignoring case).

`--nocorners`   Ignore corners in the input .tws file.  Corners are sets
              whose name starts with 'c' and whose third letter is 'r'
              (ignoring case).

`--noearlysolutions`  Don't print trivial solutions (those of length zero).

`--noedges`     Ignore edges in the input .tws file.  Edges are sets
              whose name starts with 'ed' (ignoring case).

`--noorientation`  Ignore all orientation information in the tws file.

`--nowrite`     Don't write pruning tables to disk; regenerate them every time.

`-o`    Print the order of every scramble from standard input.

`--orientationgroup` *#* For puzzles using adjacent element permutations rather
                     than explicit orientations for orientation (as is needed
                     when the orientation is not cyclic, as for the 2x2x2x2),
                     this sets the number of adjacent elements that comprise
                     a single cubie.

`-q`   Use quarter-turn metric.

`-r`   Generate and show a random position.

`-R` *#*  Set the seed for the random number generator.

`-s`    Given a set of scrambles on standard in, solve each and write
      a solution to standard out.

`-S`    Do a solve test; for the given tws file, solve sequences of
      increasing length.  The number of moves to add each time can
      be provided immediately after the argument (as in -S20).

`--schreiersims`    Run the Schreier-Sims algorithm to calculate the supergroup
                  size.  Does not account for identical pieces.

`--scramblealg` *scr*  Give a scramble to solve directly on the command line.

`--showmoves`    Given a set of scrambles on standard input (one per line),
               writes to standard output the move-format for those
               scrambles.  This way you can build composite moves; for
               instance, to make a move specification for the antislice
               move "U D" (a clockwise turn of both the up and down faces)
               on the 3x3x3, use the command

                  echo "U D" | ./twsearch --showmoves samples/3x3x3.tws

`--showpositions`  Given a set of scrambles on standard input (one per line),
                 writes to standard output the scramble-format for those
                 scrambles.

`-t` *#*  Specify the number of threads to use.

`-T`    Do a timing test.

`-u`    Read scrambles on standard input and only output unique ones (by
      the position they reach) on standard output.

`-v`   Increase verbosity.  If followed immediately by a digit, that digit
     sets the verbosity.

What is working so far:

* Parsing ksolve file
* God's algorithm
* Optimal solver for random positions
* Canonical sequence data
* Tree search using canonical sequences
* Write pruning tables
* Read pruning tables
* Parse scramble file
* Solve scramble positions
* QTM solves/pruning tables

Things to do:

* Add algebraic support for when reading scrambles
* Symmetry reduction
* Add grip information; derive moves according to SiGN
* Print antipodes on two-bit God's algorithm
* Coset solvers

Things to consider:

* Ignore pieces
* Blocking moves
